The Match Basics Concept (#104)
exercism/cairo: concepts/match-basics/about.md

# Match Basics

The `match` expression allows for easy comparison of a value against a series of patterns and afterwards run the code based on which pattern matches. Literal values, variable names, wildcards, and many other things are what makes up a pattern.

> The examples below show the `match` syntax:

Author: Noted😊.

```rust

> match enum_var {

Reviewer: You can use the example from later in the section, see https://github.com/exercism/cairo/pull/104#discussion_r1696605686

    variant_0(a, b, c) => {/* code */}
    variant_1(_) => {/* code */}
    ...
    variant_k(a, c) => {/* code */}
}

match felt_var {
    0 => { /* code */ }
    _ => { /* code */ }
}
```

> The `variant_0`, `variant_1`, `...`, and `variant_k` are all variants of an enum data type. Where `enum_var` could be any instance of the enum, after matching, executes the code in the curly braces. While the second example is the usage of the match patterning with a `felt_var` felt252 with arm patterns of value `0` and wildcard, `_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `variant_0`, `variant_1`, `...`, and `variant_k` are all variants of an enum data type. Where `enum_var` could be any instance of the enum, after matching, executes the code in the curly braces. While the second example is the usage of the match patterning with a `felt_var` felt252 with arm patterns of value `0` and wildcard, `_`.
```
As said in the last comment, the examples should be expanded to make it clear to students what's going on (meaningful examples, put match patterns inside functions that explicitly define the enums/felts type etc.).

Following the format above, we can write a function that takes in an unknown color parameter and return its true color.

```rust

> enum Color {

Reviewer: This is a good example! You can use this above instead of the enum example with placeholders.
You can then delete the sentence above (the "Following the format..." one).

Just make sure you use valid Cairo code, i.e. one that compiles

    Red,
    Yellow,
    Green,
}

> fn return_color_type(color: Color) -> felt252 {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fn print_color_type(color: Color) {
```
the function really _prints_ the color, it doesn't return anything.

    match color {
        Color:Red => println!("The color is Red"),`
        Color:Yellow => println!("The color is Yellow"),
        Color:Green => println!("The color is Green"),
    }
}
```

> The `return_color_type` function prints the color of whichever unknown parameter was provided. Given the unknown `color` value, it would have several patterns that involves each of the variants to match. The arm of code to execute for each pattern is a one liner `println!("The color is ${color}")` of whatever the value match. To handle mutiple lines of code, the arm of code should be wrapped into a curly braces `{}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To handle multiple lines of code, the `match` arm code should be wrapped in curly braces `{}`:
```
1. Instead of explaining what would happen, provide a usage example below the match pattern function, like:
```rust
fn return_color_type(...
...
}

let color = Color::Yellow;
print_color_type(color); // prints "The color is Yellow"
```
2. Provide a simple example of the multi-line arm code (again with colors).

> 

Reviewer: At the end of this section, mention the [value binding pattern](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch06-02-the-match-control-flow-construct.html#patterns-that-bind-to-values), provide a brief explanation and another simple example.

> ## Matching the `Option` enum type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Matching the `Option` Enum Type
```

> The built-in `Option` enum can as well be handled with the `match` patterning to help get the inner `T` value out of the `Some` variant and other cases. There are no difference in how the match patterning are formed for the `Option` enum, only that the variants make up the arms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The built-in `Option` enum can also be handled with the `match` expression.
```
Shorter

Let's design a function that takes in an `Option<u8>` parameter. If there is a value from the provided parameter, add one to this value else the function should return the `None` value with no operation.

```rust
fn add_one(x: Option<u8>) -> Option<u8> {
    match x {
        Option::Some(val) => Option::Some(val + 1),
        Option::None => Option::None,
    }
}

fn main() {
    let three: Option<u8> = Option::Some(3);

>     let four: Option<u8> = plus_one(three);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    let four: Option<u8> = add_one(three);
```
Always make sure the examples in the concepts compile, we don't want to mislead students

Author: I'm sorry I didn't execute this one.  I will run them next time.

Reviewer: No problem, it happens 👍

>     let none = plus_one(Option::None);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    let none = add_one(Option::None);

    println!("{three:?}"); // prints "Option::Some(3)"
    println!("{four:?}"); // prints "Option::Some(4)"
    println!("{none:?}"); // prints "Option::None(())"
```

}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> Note: `{:?}` is a special formatting syntax that allows to print a debug form of the parameter passed to the `println!` macro. You can find more information about it in [The Cairo Book](https://book.cairo-lang.org/appendix-03-derivable-traits.html#debug-for-printing-and-debugging).

```

> ## Matches cover all possible cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
no need for the subheader, the section should be short

> One benefit of using the `match` control flow is due to its exhaustive nature. In Cairo, especially in the case of `Option<T>`, it expects that every possible pattern must be exhaustively handled else it will revert at compile time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One benefit of using the `match` control flow is its exhaustive nature: the arms’ patterns must cover _all_ possibilities. Consider the version of the previous example that does not handle the `None` case:
```

```rust
fn add_one(x: Option<u8>) -> Option<u8> {
    match x {
        Option::Some(val) => Option::Some(val + 1),

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // this code does not compile, as we forgot to handle the `None` case
    }
```

}
```

> This kind of bug is easier for the compiler to spot because in this case, the possibility that the `x` value could be a null value was not handled. The revert error looks like this error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Let's keep the section short and sweet, remove the rest of this section until the next subheader.

```sh
$ scarb cairo-run
   Compiling missing_match_arm v0.1.0 (home/Scarb.toml)
error: Missing match arm: `None` not covered.
 --> home/src/lib.cairo:5:5
    match x {
    ^*******^

error: could not compile `missing_match_arm` due to previous error
error: `scarb metadata` exited with error

```

The error shows that Cairo is aware of other uncovered possible cases that x could be. This error spells out the possibility of the `x` value being null and protect us from assuming that `x` will never be null.

> ## Catch-all pattern with `_` wildcard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Catch-all Pattern with `_` Wildcard
```

> Understanding how the `_` wildcard works is essential in order to effectively handle all cases. This is most times added as the last arm of a `match` expression. This is a special pattern whose arm of code is executed only after the critical patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using enums, we can also take special actions for a few particular values, but for all other values perform one default action by adding a new arm with `_` as the pattern for the last arm of the match expression. The `_` pattern is a special pattern that matches any value and does not bind to that value.
```
provides more info

> The allow_red function receives a parameter and return true if red and false for any other color instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `is_red` function receives a parameter and returns `true` if the color is `Red` and `false` for any other color:
```
`is_red` is a more accurate name

```rust

> fn allow_red(color: Color) -> bool {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fn is_red(color: Color) -> bool {
```

    match color {
        Color::Red => true,
        _ => false,
    }
}
```

> ## Match patterning with the `or` (`|`) Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pattern Matching with the `|` Operator
```

> The Cairo `match` control flow construct allows for matching a value against multiple patterns handled by the `or` operator (`|`). With the use of the `or` operator in a match patterning, it helps achieve code simplicity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cairo `match` control flow construct allows for matching a value against multiple patterns using the `|` (_or_) operator. This helps simplify the code.
```

> For example, using the `Color` enum above, we want to write a function that returns true for `Red` or `Green` colors and false for other colors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, using the `Color` enum, we want to write a function that returns true for `Red` or `Green` colors and false for other colors:
```
nit: it is clear to which `Color` enum this is referring

```rust

> fn allow_red_and_green(color: Color) -> bool {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fn is_red_or_green(color: Color) -> bool {
```
nit: more accurate name

# Match Basics

The `match` expression allows for easy comparison of a value against a series of patterns and afterwards running the code based on the matched pattern. Literal values, variable names, wildcards, and many other things are what makes up a pattern.

```rust
#[derive(Drop)]
enum Color {
    Red,
    Yellow,
    Green,
}

fn print_color_type(color: Color) {
    match color {
        Color::Red => println!("The color is Red"),
        Color::Yellow => println!("The color is Yellow"),
        Color::Green => println!("The color is Green"),
    }
}

fn main() {
    let color = Color::Yellow;

>     specified_color(color);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    print_color_type(color); // prints "The color is Yellow"
```

The `match` expression allows for easy comparison of a value against a series of patterns and afterwards running the code based on the matched pattern. Literal values, variable names, wildcards, and many other things are what makes up a pattern.

```rust
#[derive(Drop)]
enum Color {
    Red,
    Yellow,
    Green,
}

> fn specified_color(color: Color) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fn print_color_type(color: Color) {
```
The single-line match example is good as-is

    match color {
        Color::Red => println!("The color is Red"),
        Color::Yellow => println!("The color is Yellow"),
        Color::Green => println!("The color is Green"),
    }
}

fn main() {
    let color = Color::Yellow;
    specified_color(color);
}
```

To handle multiple lines of code, the `match` arm of code should be wrapped in curly braces `{}`:

```rust
fn specified_color(color: Color) -> felt252 {
    match color {
        Color::Red => {

>             println!("The color is Red");

Reviewer: Update the function code to match [`specified_color` from SBE](https://starknet-by-example.voyager.online/getting-started/cairo_cheatsheet/match.html)

Author: I'd be adding the SBE link to the link json since this example is extracted from there.

Reviewer: Not necessary, the _links.json_ file should include links to resources where students can learn more about the subject, and SBE contains no information that is not contained in The Cairo Book.

    Green,
}

fn print_color_type(color: Color) {
    match color {
        Color::Red => println!("The color is Red"),
        Color::Yellow => println!("The color is Yellow"),
        Color::Green => println!("The color is Green"),
    }
}

> // To handle multiple lines of code, the `match` arm of code should be wrapped in curly braces `{}`:

Reviewer: I think it would look better if the multiline example was separate from the single-line example.
- place this sentence below the code block as a regular sentence, and move the multi-line example below it
- reuse the `specified_colour` function from https://starknet-by-example.voyager.online/getting-started/cairo_cheatsheet/match.html?highlight=match#match, as it makes a bit more sense than the `print_color_name` one below.

    Green,
}

> fn print_color_type(color: Color) {

Reviewer: Don't forget to change the function call name in the `main` function.

```rust
fn specified_color(color: Color) -> felt252 {
    let mut response: felt252 = '';

    match color {
        Color::Red => {
            response = 'You passed in Red';
        },
        Color::Yellow => {
            response = 'You passed in Yellow';
        },
        Color::Green => {
            response = 'You passed in Green';
        },
    }

>     response

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    response
```

}
```

> 

Reviewer: Update the `main` function on [line 75](https://github.com/exercism/cairo/pull/104/files/2262bd41e55b1c0c3dcc1bebcc6d120dabeb0aa5..100e118c3ca6a31f5bf8c3d33a93201944d7b36c#diff-1374b5d5243b6ecabc1502e957b189589cc1233c0cd25bb57888cd8b2e0120d8R75) to the following:
```rust
fn main() {
    let color = Color::Red(ColorType::Dark);
    specified_color(color);
}
```
- removes redundant blank line
- removes the space char between `::` and `Dark`

fn main() {
    let three: Option<u8> = Option::Some(3);
    let four: Option<u8> = add_one(three);
    let none = add_one(Option::None);

    println!("{three:?}"); // prints "Option::Some(3)"
    println!("{four:?}"); // prints "Option::Some(4)"
    println!("{none:?}"); // prints "Option::None(())"
}
```

> Note: `{:?}` is a special formatting syntax that allows to print a debug form of the parameter passed to the `println!` macro. You can find more information about it in [The Cairo Book](https://book.cairo-lang.org/appendix-03-derivable-traits.html#debug-for-printing-and-debugging).

One benefit of using the `match` control flow is its exhaustive nature: the arms’ patterns must cover _all_ possibilities. Consider the version of the previous example that does not handle the `None` case:

```rust
fn add_one(x: Option<u8>) -> Option<u8> {
    match x {
        Option::Some(val) => Option::Some(val + 1),
    }
     // this code does not compile, as we forgot to handle the `None` case
}
```

> The error shows that Cairo is aware of other uncovered possible cases that x could be. This error spells out the possibility of the `x` value being null and protect us from assuming that `x` will never be null.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Remove this sentence as well, as it makes little sense without the previous (now deleted) content

## Catch-all Pattern with `_` Wildcard

Using enums, we can also take special actions for a few particular values, but for all other values perform one default action by adding a new arm with `_` as the pattern for the last arm of the match expression. The `_` pattern is a special pattern that matches any value and does not bind to that value.

The `is_red` function receives a parameter and return `true` if the color is `Red` and `false` for any other color:

```rust
fn is_red(color: Color) -> bool {
    match color {
        Color::Red => true,
        _ => false,
    }
}
```

## Pattern Matching with the `|` Operator

The Cairo `match` control flow construct allows for matching a value against multiple patterns using the `|` (_or_) operator. This helps simplify the code.

For example, using the `Color` enum, we want to write a function that returns `true` for `Red` or `Green` colors and `false` for other colors:

```rust
fn is_red_or_green(color: Color) -> bool {
    match color {
        Color::Red | Color::Green => true,
        _ => false,
    }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Write a ["Matching Tuples"](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch06-02-the-match-control-flow-construct.html#matching-tuples) section, shorten it as much as you can.

## Pattern Matching with `felt252` and Integer Variables

It is possible to match `felt252` and integer variables against a set of values. However, there are some constraints;

- Only support integers that fit into a single `felt252` (i.e `u256` is not supported).
- 0 must be the first arm.
- Each arm must follow a sequential segment, contiguously with other arms.

Let's implement a six-sided die tossing game. When this die is tossed, we get a number between 0 and 5. For a toss that yields 0, 1 or 2, you win. You roll again if you have 3. You loss for other values:

```rust
fn toss(value: u8) {
    match value {
        0 | 1 | 2 => println!("you won!"),
        3 => println!("you can roll again!"),
        _ => println!("you lost...")
    }
}

fn main() {

> let x: u8 = 2;

Reviewer: Format the code

}

fn main() {

>     let x: u8 = 2;

Reviewer: nit: instead of first creating local variables, and then passing those to `toss`, just pass the integer values directly:
```rust
toss(2); // prints "you won!"
...
```

    let y: u8 = 3;
    let z: u8 = 5;

    toss(x); // prints "you won!".
    toss(y); // prints "you can roll again!".
    toss(z); // prints "you lost...".
}
```

## Matching Tuples

Tuples can also be matched against a set of patterns. These patterns are designed similarly as a tuple.

```rust

> ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// ...
```
nit: make this a comment

#[derive(Drop)]
enum DayType {
    Week,
    Weekend,
    Holiday
}

> fn vending_machine_accept(c: (DayType, Color)) -> bool {

Reviewer: This example makes little logical sense: why would a vending machine accept a _color_. Either create a different example that makes sense with `Color`, or copy the `Coin` enum from TCB into this example and use that instead.

    match c {
        (DayType::Week, _) => true, // accepts all colors during week day
        (_, Color::Red) | (_, Color::Green) => true, // accepts only Red or Green color for all specified days
        (_, _) => false, // returns false for other instances
    }
}
```

> Using `(_, _)` is unnecessary as it performs the same functionality as using a single wildcard: `_ =>` syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last match arm, it doesn't matter if we use `(_, _)` or just the `_` wildcard to match any day and color combination, because they're functionally the same.
```
Reworded to be a bit more clear.
